The Prototype Design Pattern is a creational pattern that allows you to clone an existing object instead of creating a new one from scratch using the new keyword.

✅ When to Use:
Object creation is expensive (time, memory, or resources).

You want to avoid repeated constructor logic.

You need many similar objects with only slight differences.

You want to improve performance in object creation-heavy code.

📦 Key Concepts:
Java provides the clone() method via the Object class.

To enable cloning, implement the Cloneable interface and override clone().

The constructor is not called during cloning — you copy the existing object directly.

Why new Can Be Expensive
Using new isn't slow by itself, but the setup done inside the constructor can make it expensive:

🚩 Expensive Areas:
Heavy Constructor Logic

e.g., DB calls, file loading, server fetches.

Complex Object Graphs

Objects containing other complex objects.

Memory Pressure

Frequent use of new increases garbage collection.

Repetitive Setup

Many objects with similar fields/configs.

Multithreading Overhead

Shared resource contention in constructors.

🧠 Key Insight:
By cloning, you bypass the constructor and reuse a ready-made object, which improves performance and reduces setup complexity.

So yes — cloning helps sideline the setup and provides a faster, memory-efficient way to create objects in some use cases.


Predefined Cloneable Interface in Java Standard Library.It will Helps to reuse already defined interface and we can override the clone

method on our requirement.


The Cloneable interface is part of Java's standard library. It's a marker interface, which means:

It doesn’t have any methods.

It’s used to signal the Java runtime that your class intends to support object cloning using the clone() method.

✅ Where Is It Defined?



package java.lang;

public interface Cloneable {
}
Since it's in java.lang, you don’t need to import it — it's available by default in every Java program.

⚠️ Why Is It Required?
If you try to call clone() on an object without implementing Cloneable, you’ll get:


java.lang.CloneNotSupportedException
So you must implement it like this:

class Student implements Cloneable {
    // your class logic here
}

@Override
protected Object clone() throws CloneNotSupportedException {
    return super.clone();
}


Limitations

Not possible for deep cloning. shallow cloning only possible. so whenever there is another object references aside of primitive types

This will points to previous object only. so if change happens in original object for that reference, in copy object also made.